# Creating a Release

## Release workflow

As release workflow we use the Gitflow Workflow (see https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows#gitflow-workflow).

For releasing a new version of this project, we integrated the <code>jgitflow-maven-plugin</code> (see https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/jgit-flow/wiki/Home).

Steps to build a new version:

1. Checkout branch <code>development</code>.
2. Run <code>mvn install -Pwith-app</code>.
3. If the build was successful, run <code>mvn jgitflow:release-start jgitflow:release-finish -Pwith-app,with-dep-poms</code>.
    - You will be asked for the release version. Leave this empty to keep the current snapshot version as release version number (<code>-SNAPSHOT</code> will be cut of by jgitflow-maven-plugin).
    - You will be asked for the next development version. Leave this empty and the plugin will increment the micro release number (<code>1.0.1-SNAPSHOT</code> becomes <code>1.0.2-SNAPSHOT</code>). If you want to alter the version just type e.g. <code>1.1.0-SNAPSHOT</code>.

4. The result is that the current state of branch <code>development</code> gets merged to branch <code>master</code> (without -SNAPSHOT), tagged as <code>releases/version-1.0.1</code> and the development version is automatically increased.

### Version numbers

Version Numbers = major.minor.micro

For correct generation of android version codes the releases have to be at least minor releases. Micro releases are reserved for hotfixes of a published release.
- Finish of a release: Increase major or minor number
- Finish of a hotfix (merged directly back to branch <code>master</code>): Increase micro number

### Android Version Code

The <code>versionCode</code> for the Android app is autogenerated by the projects version.
The convention for the versionCode <code>aaabbbccd</code> (generated of version <code>aaa.bbb.cc</code>) is:
  - d: one digit for SNAPSHOT (0), Release Candidates (RC1 to RC8 = 1..8) or Final Release (9)
  - cc: two digits for micro releases (with leading zeros)
  - bbb: three digits for minor releases (with leading zeros)
  - aaa: major releases (if a > 0)


### Local configuration for jgitflow-maven-plugin

The <code>jgitflow-maven-plugin</code> needs credentials for git, which are configurated as variables in <code>sormas-base/pom.xml</code>. 
To use it you need to configure this in your .m2/settings.xml (or pass it as arguments when executing the plugin).

        <profiles>
                <profile>
                        <id>github-config</id>
                        <!-- For jgitflow-maven-plugin against github.com -->
                        <properties>
                                <github.sormas.user>myUserName</github.sormas.user>
                                <github.sormas.password>myPassword</github.sormas.password>
                        </properties>
                </profile>
        </profiles>

        <activeProfiles>
                <activeProfile>github-config</activeProfile>
        </activeProfiles>

### Perform load testing and upload the results

When a release has been done and the new SORMAS version has been deployed to the server that is used for load testing, refer to the [load testing guide](LOAD_TESTING.md) to perform them, ideally multiple times with different amounts of users set in the SimulationConfig.scala file (e.g. 1, 20, 100). Navigate to the results folder, rename the folders containing the individual tests (e.g. SIMULATION-NAME_AMOUNT-OF-USERS_SORMAS-VERSION) and zip them. Append the resulting archive to the release on GitHub, as well as a PDF file containing an overview of the results (see an earlier release for an example on how to do this; you'll need to open the individual simulations and retrieve the values from the respective index.html files).
